README.md, before:

# JSONb Accessor

[![Gem Version](https://badge.fury.io/rb/jsonb_accessor.svg)](http://badge.fury.io/rb/jsonb_accessor) [![Build Status](https://travis-ci.org/devmynd/jsonb_accessor.svg)](https://travis-ci.org/devmynd/jsonb_accessor)

Adds typed `jsonb` backed fields as first class citizens to your `ActiveRecord` models. This gem is similar in spirit to [HstoreAccessor](https://github.com/devmynd/hstore_accessor), but the `jsonb` column in PostgreSQL has a few distinct advantages, mostly around nested documents and support for collections.

## Table of Contents

* [Installation](#installation)
* [Usage](#usage)
* [Scopes](#scopes)
* [Single-Table Inheritance](#single-table-inheritance)
* [Dependencies](#dependencies)
* [Validations](#validations)
* [Development](#development)
* [Contributing](#contributing)

## Installation

Add this line to your application's `Gemfile`:

```ruby
gem "jsonb_accessor"
```

And then execute:

    $ bundle install

## Usage

First we must create a model which has a `jsonb` column available to store data into it:

```ruby
class CreateProducts < ActiveRecord::Migration
  def change
    create_table :products do |t|
      t.jsonb :data
    end
  end
end
```

We can then declare the `jsonb` fields we wish to expose via the accessor:

```ruby
class Product < ActiveRecord::Base
  jsonb_accessor :data,
    title: :string,
    id_value: :value,
    external_id: :integer,
    reviewed_at: :datetime
end
```

## Scopes

Let's say we have a class that looks like this:

```ruby
class Product < ActiveRecord::Base
  jsonb_accessor :data,
    name: :string,
    price: [:integer, store_key: :p],
    price_in_cents: :integer,
    reviewed_at: :datetime
end
```

Jsonb Accessor will add a `scope` to `Product` called `data_where`.

```ruby
Product.all.data_where(name: "Granite Towel", price: 17)
```

For number fields you can query using `<` or `>`or use plain english if that's what you prefer.

```ruby
Product.all.data_where(price: { <: 15 })
Product.all.data_where(price: { less_than: 15 })
Product.all.data_where(price: { less_than_or_equal_to: 15 })

Product.all.data_where(price: { >: 15 })
Product.all.data_where(price: { greater_than: 15 })
Product.all.data_where(price: { greater_than_or_equal_to: 15 })

Product.all.data_where(price: { greater_than: 15, less_than: 30 })
```

For time related fields you can query using `before` and `after`.

```ruby
Product.all.data_where(reviewed_at: { before: Time.current.beginning_of_week, after: 4.weeks.ago })
```

This scope is a convenient wrapper around the `jsonb_where` `scope` that saves you from having to convert the given keys to the store keys and from specifying the column.

### `jsonb_where`

Works just like the [`scope` above](#scopes) except that it does not convert the given keys to store keys and you must specify the column name. For example:

```ruby
Product.all.jsonb_where(:data, reviewed_at: { before: Time.current }, p: { greater_than: 5 })

# instead of

Product.all.data_where(reviewed_at: { before: Time.current }, price: { greater_than: 5 })
```
This scope makes use of the `jsonb_contains`, `jsonb_number_query`, and `jsonb_time_query` `scope`s.

### `jsonb_contains`

Returns all records that contain the given JSON paths.

```ruby
Product.all.jsonb_contains(:data, title: "foo")
Product.all.jsonb_contains(:data, reviewed_at: 10.minutes.ago, p: 12) # Using the store key
```

**Note:** Under the hood, `jsonb_contains` uses the [`@>` operator in Postgres](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/9.5/static/functions-json.html) so when you include an array query, the stored array and the array used for the query do not need to match exactly. For example, when queried with `[1, 2]`, records that have arrays of `[2, 1, 3]` will be returned.

### `jsonb_number_query`

Returns all records that match the given criteria.

```ruby
Product.all.jsonb_number_query(:data, :price_in_cents, :greater_than, 300)
```

It supports:

* `>`
* `>=`
* `greater_than`
* `greater_than_or_equal_to`
* `<`
* `<=`
* `less_than`
* `less_than_or_equal_to`

and it is indifferent to strings/symbols.

### `jsonb_time_query`

Returns all records that match the given criteria.

```ruby
Product.all.jsonb_time_query(:data, :reviewed_at, :before, 2.days.ago)
```

It supports `before` and `after` and is indifferent to strings/symbols.

## Single-Table Inheritance

One of the big issues with `ActiveRecord` single-table inheritance (STI)
is sparse columns.  Essentially, as sub-types of the original table
diverge further from their parent more columns are left empty in a given
table.  Postgres' `jsonb` type provides part of the solution in that
the values in an `jsonb` column does not impose a structure - different
rows can have different values.

We set up our table with an `jsonb` field:

```ruby
# db/migration/<timestamp>_create_players.rb
class CreateVehicles < ActiveRecord::Migration
  def change
    create_table :vehicles do |t|
      t.string :make
      t.string :model
      t.integer :model_year
      t.string :type
      t.jsonb :data
    end
  end
end
```

And for our models:

```ruby
# app/models/vehicle.rb
class Vehicle < ActiveRecord::Base
end

# app/models/vehicles/automobile.rb
class Automobile < Vehicle
  jsonb_accessor :data,
    axle_count: :integer,
    weight: :float
end

# app/models/vehicles/airplane.rb
class Airplane < Vehicle
  jsonb_accessor :data,
    engine_type: :string,
    safety_rating: :integer
end
```

From here any attributes specific to any sub-class can be stored in the
`jsonb` column avoiding sparse data.  Indices can also be created on
individual fields in an `jsonb` column.

This approach was originally conceived by Joe Hirn in [this blog
post](http://www.devmynd.com/blog/2013-3-single-table-inheritance-hstore-lovely-combination).

## Validations

Because this gem promotes attributes nested into the JSON column to first level attributes, most validations should just work. Please leave us feedback if they're not working as expected.

## Dependencies

- ActiveRecord 5.0
- Ruby >= 2.2.2
- Postgres >= 9.4 (in order to use the [jsonb column type](http://www.postgresql.org/docs/9.4/static/datatype-json.html)).

## Development

After checking out the repo, run `bin/setup` to install dependencies (make sure postgres is running first).

Run `bin/console` for an interactive prompt that will allow you to experiment.

`rake` will run Rubocop and the specs.

## Contributing

1. [Fork it](https://github.com/devmynd/jsonb_accessor/fork)
2. Create your feature branch (`git checkout -b my-new-feature`)
3. Add tests and changes (run the tests with `rake`)
4. Commit your changes (`git commit -am 'Add some feature'`)
5. Push to the branch (`git push origin my-new-feature`)
6. Create a new Pull Request

Commit message:

Added note about the beta

README.md, after:

# JSONb Accessor

[![Gem Version](https://badge.fury.io/rb/jsonb_accessor.svg)](http://badge.fury.io/rb/jsonb_accessor) [![Build Status](https://travis-ci.org/devmynd/jsonb_accessor.svg)](https://travis-ci.org/devmynd/jsonb_accessor)

Adds typed `jsonb` backed fields as first class citizens to your `ActiveRecord` models. This gem is similar in spirit to [HstoreAccessor](https://github.com/devmynd/hstore_accessor), but the `jsonb` column in PostgreSQL has a few distinct advantages, mostly around nested documents and support for collections.

## 1.0 Beta

This README reflects the 1.0 beta. Method names and interfaces may still change.

## Table of Contents

* [Installation](#installation)
* [Usage](#usage)
* [Scopes](#scopes)
* [Single-Table Inheritance](#single-table-inheritance)
* [Dependencies](#dependencies)
* [Validations](#validations)
* [Development](#development)
* [Contributing](#contributing)

## Installation

Add this line to your application's `Gemfile`:

```ruby
gem "jsonb_accessor"
```

And then execute:

    $ bundle install

## Usage

First we must create a model which has a `jsonb` column available to store data into it:

```ruby
class CreateProducts < ActiveRecord::Migration
  def change
    create_table :products do |t|
      t.jsonb :data
    end
  end
end
```

We can then declare the `jsonb` fields we wish to expose via the accessor:

```ruby
class Product < ActiveRecord::Base
  jsonb_accessor :data,
    title: :string,
    id_value: :value,
    external_id: :integer,
    reviewed_at: :datetime
end
```

## Scopes

Let's say we have a class that looks like this:

```ruby
class Product < ActiveRecord::Base
  jsonb_accessor :data,
    name: :string,
    price: [:integer, store_key: :p],
    price_in_cents: :integer,
    reviewed_at: :datetime
end
```

Jsonb Accessor will add a `scope` to `Product` called `data_where`.

```ruby
Product.all.data_where(name: "Granite Towel", price: 17)
```

For number fields you can query using `<` or `>`or use plain english if that's what you prefer.

```ruby
Product.all.data_where(price: { <: 15 })
Product.all.data_where(price: { less_than: 15 })
Product.all.data_where(price: { less_than_or_equal_to: 15 })

Product.all.data_where(price: { >: 15 })
Product.all.data_where(price: { greater_than: 15 })
Product.all.data_where(price: { greater_than_or_equal_to: 15 })

Product.all.data_where(price: { greater_than: 15, less_than: 30 })
```

For time related fields you can query using `before` and `after`.

```ruby
Product.all.data_where(reviewed_at: { before: Time.current.beginning_of_week, after: 4.weeks.ago })
```

This scope is a convenient wrapper around the `jsonb_where` `scope` that saves you from having to convert the given keys to the store keys and from specifying the column.

### `jsonb_where`

Works just like the [`scope` above](#scopes) except that it does not convert the given keys to store keys and you must specify the column name. For example:

```ruby
Product.all.jsonb_where(:data, reviewed_at: { before: Time.current }, p: { greater_than: 5 })

# instead of

Product.all.data_where(reviewed_at: { before: Time.current }, price: { greater_than: 5 })
```
This scope makes use of the `jsonb_contains`, `jsonb_number_query`, and `jsonb_time_query` `scope`s.

### `jsonb_contains`

Returns all records that contain the given JSON paths.

```ruby
Product.all.jsonb_contains(:data, title: "foo")
Product.all.jsonb_contains(:data, reviewed_at: 10.minutes.ago, p: 12) # Using the store key
```

**Note:** Under the hood, `jsonb_contains` uses the [`@>` operator in Postgres](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/9.5/static/functions-json.html) so when you include an array query, the stored array and the array used for the query do not need to match exactly. For example, when queried with `[1, 2]`, records that have arrays of `[2, 1, 3]` will be returned.

### `jsonb_number_query`

Returns all records that match the given criteria.

```ruby
Product.all.jsonb_number_query(:data, :price_in_cents, :greater_than, 300)
```

It supports:

* `>`
* `>=`
* `greater_than`
* `greater_than_or_equal_to`
* `<`
* `<=`
* `less_than`
* `less_than_or_equal_to`

and it is indifferent to strings/symbols.

### `jsonb_time_query`

Returns all records that match the given criteria.

```ruby
Product.all.jsonb_time_query(:data, :reviewed_at, :before, 2.days.ago)
```

It supports `before` and `after` and is indifferent to strings/symbols.

## Single-Table Inheritance

One of the big issues with `ActiveRecord` single-table inheritance (STI)
is sparse columns.  Essentially, as sub-types of the original table
diverge further from their parent more columns are left empty in a given
table.  Postgres' `jsonb` type provides part of the solution in that
the values in an `jsonb` column does not impose a structure - different
rows can have different values.

We set up our table with an `jsonb` field:

```ruby
# db/migration/<timestamp>_create_players.rb
class CreateVehicles < ActiveRecord::Migration
  def change
    create_table :vehicles do |t|
      t.string :make
      t.string :model
      t.integer :model_year
      t.string :type
      t.jsonb :data
    end
  end
end
```

And for our models:

```ruby
# app/models/vehicle.rb
class Vehicle < ActiveRecord::Base
end

# app/models/vehicles/automobile.rb
class Automobile < Vehicle
  jsonb_accessor :data,
    axle_count: :integer,
    weight: :float
end

# app/models/vehicles/airplane.rb
class Airplane < Vehicle
  jsonb_accessor :data,
    engine_type: :string,
    safety_rating: :integer
end
```

From here any attributes specific to any sub-class can be stored in the
`jsonb` column avoiding sparse data.  Indices can also be created on
individual fields in an `jsonb` column.

This approach was originally conceived by Joe Hirn in [this blog
post](http://www.devmynd.com/blog/2013-3-single-table-inheritance-hstore-lovely-combination).

## Validations

Because this gem promotes attributes nested into the JSON column to first level attributes, most validations should just work. Please leave us feedback if they're not working as expected.

## Dependencies

- ActiveRecord 5.0
- Ruby >= 2.2.2
- Postgres >= 9.4 (in order to use the [jsonb column type](http://www.postgresql.org/docs/9.4/static/datatype-json.html)).

## Development

After checking out the repo, run `bin/setup` to install dependencies (make sure postgres is running first).

Run `bin/console` for an interactive prompt that will allow you to experiment.

`rake` will run Rubocop and the specs.

## Contributing

1. [Fork it](https://github.com/devmynd/jsonb_accessor/fork)
2. Create your feature branch (`git checkout -b my-new-feature`)
3. Add tests and changes (run the tests with `rake`)
4. Commit your changes (`git commit -am 'Add some feature'`)
5. Push to the branch (`git push origin my-new-feature`)
6. Create a new Pull Request
